I didn't make the entire operation on about the
seventh or eighth day. I was with a patrol that had
gone out to try to establish contact with the point
elements of the enemy division to see exactly
where they were. We knew we were close, but we
didn't exactly know where their strength was. A
lot of patrols were being sent out. The patrol I was
with, I wasn't in charge. A second lieutenant was
in charge. I was the assistant patrol leader. At
that time, I was a platoon sergeant. We ran into an
enemy patrol that just so happened by misfortune
to be coming south while we were going north.
The point groups of each patrol exchanged fire.
They had a larger patrol than we did, and they
rapidly gained fire superiority. We started
shooting from the hip, falling back. We got
disoriented, and we got separated because of the
terrain. Very thick undergrowth. It was a high
canopy of jungle overhead. There was a lot of
smoke. There was a lot of dust. There was mortar
fire coming in. I was backing up, shooting from the
hip. And my magazine made that particular noise it
does, or my rifle, when you hit an empty magazine.
And it was pretty quick, the empty one, when you
were in that situation. I was trying to change
magazines, but still backing up. And somehow I
stepped out into space, stepped over a creek bank,
fell about eight or nine feet down to some rocks
below.
being scared and having bit off more than we could
chew. And it looked like, from what we could tell at
that time, we'd run into a whole battalion. I don't
think it was really that big, but it felt like it.
The fire was that heavy. I was separated at that
point from anybody else in the patrol. There was no
other Americans around. I was moving down this
creek. It was pretty shallow, about ankle-deep
water, a lot of rocks, overhanging vines.
Finally, I ran into two more guys that were
crouched in the creek bed, and we started going
back together. The lieutenant had been killed
outright. Most of the first squad had been pretty
well taken out. We grouped up with some others.
There were a couple of wounded men. We started
carrying them. All told, it was about nine or 10 of
us. We worked our way back into our lines. Being
that I was the assistant patrol leader, I gave the
report as to what we had seen. And I gave my
estimation as to what the enemy strength was. And I
identified on the map as to where we met contact.
And that was really all I could do, as close as I
could tell, which is pretty confusing. By this
time, the battalion area was coming under fire.
Mortar fire, 120-millimeter Russian rockets was
coming in. The battalion commander told me, it was
a good report, I guess it was, he said that I needed
to get over to BAS and get my leg tended to. It was
only then that I noticed that from my knee down, see
that scar there? I took a piece of shrapnel, it
worked its way in along that bone and worked up
under my knee. And I had my whole combat boot and my
whole lower leg was solid blood. And I hadn't even
realized that I thought I was wet because of the
creek, which I'd been walking in. And so as soon as
that evening, right before it got dark, they
medevaced me out. They put a tag on me. And I wasn't
considered bad off to get immediate evacuation. I
went out with a second group of evacuees. They took
me back to a field hospital that was set up at Dong
Ha. And then they gave me sodium pentothal there. I
was more tired than I was hurt, because we'd been on
our feet for days. And then I was put into a C-123,
flying boxcar-type aircraft. It had racks,
stretchers along both sides. And they gave me salt
water intravenously because of the Dehydration.
We'd been without water, and it was real hot
anyway, and then with the fire they'd set that we'd
been fighting for days, too. It was just extreme
heat. We'd lost a lot of men, too. Sunstroke, heat
exhaustion. And I kind of passed out. I don't
remember what happened, but I came to, and I was at
Da Nang General Hospital back in the rear. And I
spent three days there, and then they... sent me by
helicopter out to the hospital ship repose. And I
recuperated out there for a period of time, which I
thoroughly enjoyed. They had nurses there, and
they had milkshakes, and it was great. I hated to
leave. The outfit, in the meantime, had gone ahead
and blunted the attack of the North Vietnamese
Division. By the time I got back, I got back in time.
When I rejoined my outfit, I was walking with a
cane. And I was considered a part of the sick, lame,
and lazy, is what they called them. were excused
from full duty. We had received a bunch of
replacements and about 300 men to the battalion,
but the battalion was still out in the field. So
being one of the senior NCOs that was at that time in
the rear, I found billets for these people and
tried to get weapons issued to them. People that
came over, replacements didn't come with rifles.
We issued them rifles in country. We issued all
their equipment right there. They were raw. Most
of them had no more than eight weeks training. All
of them. The highest ranking person there was a
lance corporal that had been in the service maybe
six months. Most of them were right out of boot
camp.
I also had the duty of having to identify the dead
from the battalion because we'd taken a lot of
casualties on this operation. So I had to go up to
the body bag area. I saw my best friend. That got me
kind of shook up. We was opening up the body bags and
A guy that I'd been in boot camp with, and served two
tours of duty in Vietnam with, and been to Okinawa
with, and across the water with. In fact, he had
been to my home several times. Good friend. It was
really a shock to identify these bodies. It was
most of my outfit, it seemed like at the time. I
remember walking away from there. I was so shook
up. I think I was even crying. To tell you the truth,
it sounds bad. It didn't sound bad. It was pretty
rough. When you have people that you know that
you've cut up with and laughed with and joked with
and worked with, and suddenly you're opening up
little green bags and looking at them and saying,
this is so-and-so and that's so-and-so. But they
had to have a positive idea on everybody. We all
wore dog tags, but... Many times the dog tags
weren't on for somebody when they found them for
various reasons. And then a lot of times some of us
took our dog tags off when we went out on night
patrols because they jingled. And we didn't want
anything to make a noise. So there was a lot of
reasons, but everybody didn't have a dog tag. So we
had to go by where we could identify them by
somebody that knew them. Sometimes you couldn't
even do that. After Operation Hastings, I...
wrangled with a battalion sergeant major five
days R&R in Bangkok, which I thoroughly enjoyed.
And I won't go into that, but... Prostitutes,
booze, and bras, huh? Well, it was a... Don't
worry, your wife won't hear this. It was a great
relief from where I'd been. And the people in
Thailand made us feel very welcome. I say that,
that I will always be indebted to the Thai people.
They treated us so kind. Their kindness was just
unbelievable. Even when we didn't have money,
they still treated us kind, which was very
unusual. Most American GIs had learned when the
money runs out, the kindness runs out. But I have to
say, as a tribute to those people, to my dying day,
I'll remember the Thai people for their kindness.
Of course, they were concerned about the
Vietnamese coming into Thailand, and they very
much are pro-American in Thailand. It's one of our
staunch allies there. My uncle flew out of
Thailand. His base is in Thailand. He flew across
Cambodia and Laos and bombed. Thailand is a
country I will always admire, and someday, if I
have a chance, I'll go back to Bangkok and take my
family, because it's a... It's a kind city, and at
that time, it was made up of kind people. I remember
that. I was given free meals. I was given free
liquor. I won't go into all the things that was free
in Thailand, but it was a nice place. It was five
days of relief. And it was like going from hell to
heaven, the comparison. But then I had to go back to
Vietnam. I remember the day came, and the hotel
people came around and woke us all up that was
there. They did it with the greatest kindness.
They said they were really sorry to tell us, but we
had to leave. And our time was up. The plane was
waiting for us. So we went back to Vietnam. And I got
back and was returned to full duty, naturally, in
time for a, I think, right after I got back, I was on a
Sparrowhawk mission in North Vietnam. It was an
unsuccessful one. We went in to pick up a downed
pilot, but the enemy had already got him. We found
the crash site of the F4. We destroyed anything of
importance militarily on the craft that we could.
And we radioed for pickup. We pulled back out of
there again. After that, spent a little bit of time
around Camelot fortifying it, digging holes,
long bunkers, filling sandbags, laying
concertina wire. And there was a lot of this kind of
working parties in between time. Any time that we
weren't actively engaged with the enemy, we were
filling sandbags, digging holes, laying
concertina, putting out minefields, or
something like that. They always had work for you.
It never ended. But we'd grown used to that. That
was life. That's what life was then. We had
Operation Deckhouse 4. I always remember
Deckhouse 4 as a real screw-up operation. They
formed up the 26th Marines, which is another
regiment, and it was going to become part of the 4th
Marine Division, which I'm not sure was ever
really truly activated. The 26th Marines was the
first regiment of the 4th Marine Division to be
activated since World War II. They'd had them
then. 26 was made up of replacements of cooks,
bakers, Remington Raiders. That's typist.
Anybody and everybody they could put together to
form a regiment of Marines. Uh, we were to operate
with the 26th Marines by we, I mean what was left of
the fourth Marines at this time. And we were pretty
dismal. We didn't look like a regular Marine
regiment. We were few in number. We were dirty. We
had torn uniforms. We were suntan to the degree.
Every person in my outfit had a 28-inch waist
because there was no fat on us. We had marched the
length of Vietnam at least twice. We looked more
like a gang of pirates than we did Marines. But the
26th had fresh uniforms, fresh combat boots,
fresh helmets. Their helmet covers were newly
camouflaged. They had the latest in equipment. A
lot of our M14s were so banged around. Some of us at
that time still had M14s. Some had M16s. They were
phasing them out by then. You mentioned you
despise the M16. I don't like the M16. We call it the
Mattel toy. They always show it in the pictures you
see at Vietnam. They show that's the only weapon
that was there was the M16. But the M14 did a lot of
fighting over there, and a lot of the outfits never
had anything but M14s. I have a Mini. A Mini 14?
Mm-hmm. I like the M14. It was a good solid weapon,
and it was the last of the American-issue weapons
that had a real solid wooden stock. It had a good
bayonet. It was heavy enough that if you did get
into hand-to-hand combat, which I was only in one
time in the whole time, but we did have one time,
that you could fight with something. The M16 fires
faster. It has a higher muzzle velocity. The
cyclic rate of fire is greater, but it's... It
tends to jam more. That's my experience. I never
had an M14 jam with me as many times as an M16 would.
If you went on an operation with an M16, you knew it
was going to jam on you. It was going to jam. It was
just a matter of when. No matter how much you tried
to keep it clean, and we cleaned them every
opportunity we get. We cleaned our magazines. We
even cleaned the ammunition individually, round
by round, to keep every bit of grain of sand off it.
Because a grain of sand caught between the sides of
the spring in a magazine would jam it. And instead
of your ammo feeding up by the spring pressure, it
would get caught. And if we would fire around,
there wouldn't be anything there. because the
other one was stuck down in the magazine. Then
you'd have to field strip a weapon, pull out a
magazine, pull out the ammunition, pull out the
spring, clean it. And this is a rough thing to do in
the middle of a battle. People get killed that way.
The M16 got a lot of good men killed. But that's
another story. I won't get off on that. Anyway,
getting back to this Operation Deckhouse 4, the 26
Marines were moving forward. in full regimental
strength. We were on their flanks. We were there
mainly as guides because we were combat veterans
and we knew the terrain. The 26th was supposed to
bear the brunt of the fighting. We were
understrength. We were sick. We were suffering
from malaria and dysentery, and we weren't
supposed to do anything more than provide guides
for them to go in to, again, once again, come up
against the 242nd B Division of the North
Vietnamese Army. We seemed to always be fighting
them. Wherever we went, they were there. Well,
they ran into them. The North Vietnamese were
regulars. They were seasoned veterans. They'd
fought many a Marine by this time. They knew all the
tricks of the trade. They laid down a heavy barrage
of 120 millimeter Russian rockets on the 26
Marines. And the regiment, who had never been
tested in battle before, they didn't phase them in
gradually. They just threw them into a major
battle. They ran. You won't find that in the
history books or you won't see it on TV, but the 26th
Marines ran. Half of them threw down their rifles
and ran. It was to the rear march with track shoes.
It wasn't an organized retreat. It was en route.
They threw the 4th Marines in between what was left
of the 4th Marines, in between the retreat of the
26th Marines and the advance of an enemy division.
That was the end of the 4th Marine Regiment in
Vietnam for all practical purposes. We stopped
the advance of an enemy division. We were an
understrength regiment. We were a regiment of
about 1,500 men. They threw us against 20,000
regulars. 20,000?
North Vietnamese Division, roughly 20,000 men.
And they wiped you out? They pretty well wiped us
out. E Company, 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines, three
days later had 17 men left in the company out of a
line company of 208 officers and men. Someone told
me that you were in a combat situation where the
only way you survived was having dead bodies piled
on top of you. Was this the situation? That was the
situation. We were in a little area. As the troops
were moving, you got to understand the interplay
of large bodies of troops, battalions,
companies. My company went into an area. We were
trying to, this was a multiple day operation. It
wasn't something that happened in an afternoon.
It was over a period of several days. The 26th was
falling back on the coast. We were trying to cover
it. We were falling back, but slower. Trying to lay
down protective fire, fall back, stop them with
fire, call in artillery, airstrikes, fall back.
It was kind of a leapfrog type thing. We were
allowing the 26th what was... Actually, they
didn't take that many casualties. They didn't
stay around to take casualties. As you can tell by
the tone of my voice, I don't have very much use for
the 26th Marines. But... Anyway, someone decided
that we needed an enemy prisoner. My company
commander at this time was a new man. He had been
sent over to us from a motor transport outfit. He
didn't have any infantry experience. He had very
little combat experience. But he was a captain,
and they needed a captain. And he filled the bill at
the time. His mission was to capture a prisoner and
get him back to battalion for questioning. And we
got sucked into an ambush. A North Vietnamese
regular came out, fired at us, and ran back down the
hill. The captain ordered a platoon, first
platoon of our company, to go send a squad to get
this man. Everyone advised against it, but he was
the captain and he ordered it. So the squad went.
The squad was pretty well wiped out in seconds by
grazing fire from surrounding hills. Instead of
taking his losses and falling back and calling in
heavier weapons, he sent in the rest of the first
platoon to try to get the survivors of the first
squad out. The first platoon was chewed up in the
meat grinder. Again, we begged him to fall back,
call in heavy weapons. There's no use killing more
men, but he sent in the other two platoons of the
rifle company to try to get out the first platoon.
He was at this point in tears. He got so many men
killed. He couldn't think of anything except he
had made a blunder, a mistake, and he was trying to
pull it out some way. So the other two platoons,
second and third platoon, weapons platoon was
attached at this time to the various rifle
platoons we went into. My own feeling was we were
walking into it. I knew it. I felt it. I really
wasn't all that scared. I guess I'd accepted that I
was going to die. That was just all there is to it,
because that was what was going to happen. I'd been
in combat too long. You become a realist after a
while. The human body doesn't stand up against too
much flying metal. And we got hit, naturally. We
expected it. We did. The heavy weapons that had
chewed up the rest of our company got us, too. The
captain was hit. People were yelling for Corman.
They were shooting everywhere. There was smoke.
There was dirt. People were falling. People were
screaming. Somebody, I don't remember who right
now, he wasn't in my platoon, fell on me. He was a
heavy guy. I think his name was Edwards.
Fell as in dead? Yeah, fell as in dead. He fell on me,
and blood was all over me. I had just emptied my
magazine. I had an empty magazine. And I was in the
process of changing magazines, switching. We had
magazines taped to magazines for quick change.
And I was trying to switch it around when he fell on
me. I fell down the grass. He was on top of me. And
about that time, the shooting stopped. There was a
couple of pops, a few more pops. And then there was
nothing. It was just quiet. You could smell the
carbide and the smoke. And as always, the flies was
already buzzing around. I just laid there
thinking I was the only one left alive because
there was no resistance. The company had been...
I'm sorry. We had been ambushed, effectively
ambushed. The fire had discontinued. Yeah, the
fire had discontinued. It was quiet. And I was
covered in blood, not my own. And the enemy
soldiers, North Vietnamese regulars, were
walking around. I could see their feet. I didn't
dare raise my head. I didn't even move. I tried to
suppress my breathing. They were taking rings and
watches off of my friends and my buddies. They were
laughing. They'd wiped out a Marine company. I
felt pretty good about it, I guess. As it turned
out, there were more of us than just myself. Half a
squad had managed to pull back up the hill before
they got sucked in the valley, and they were up
there There were a few others that were wounded
that managed to fake that they were dead. There
were some that were wounded that were killed
during this period of time. I heard they shot them
or they bayoneted them. More often than not, they
bayoneted them, no use wasting a bullet.
It was a long night. I sat there. As luck would have
it, I fell into an ant bed. But I didn't move. The
ants were crawling all over me and biting the hell
out of me.
And I guess I had all kinds of thoughts that night. I
even considered suicide rather than become a
North Vietnamese prisoner. They didn't treat
Marines too good, at least that's what we had
heard. But I was afraid to move. I was cramped, too.
I had a cramp in my leg. It
sounds
kind of looking back on it now 20 something years
ago It sounds Probably for civilized society,
pretty gross, I guess. But
that's the way it was. I was a sergeant. I was a
platoon sergeant. I was scared. I felt alone. I was
hurting. I was cramping. But I didn't dare move. I
didn't dare massage the cramp, which you feel
instinctively you've got to do. I could hear the
enemy. They were not that far away. I could hear
them talking. In Vietnamese, I guess my fear was
greater than my suffering. At that point, at least
it controlled everything else. It's the kind of
situation, and what I mean by gross is you don't
even move when you go to the bathroom. You just go.
It's pretty gross, I admit that. War is gross, and
that was about the grossest part I'd been involved
in up to that point. You hadn't received any actual
war? I wasn't sure, to tell you the truth, at that
point. I wasn't sure that I wasn't wounded. I was
hurt. I was cramped. I was in an awkward position. I
was covered in blood, and I had, when you're
scared, your adrenaline flows. I can look back on
it educated now. And your adrenaline conceals a
multitude of sins. You don't know whether you're
wounded, and I'd been wounded before and not known
it. I wasn't sure. I didn't think I was. But I wasn't
honestly sure one way or the other. We were tired
anyway, which was so... I guess I slept off a known
part of the night. Catnapped, more than anything.
Every time a twig broke, I'd wake up. I heard some
whispering. But I wasn't sure. I thought it was
American... But I wasn't sure, and I was afraid.
And there was somebody calling for water. I kept
hearing somebody call for water. I was sure of
that. In my mind, I was sure of it, but I was afraid it
might be a trick, too, to see if there was anybody
else that they could get. We were in elephant
grass. Elephant grass is like, the closest thing
in Texas to it is Johnson grass. It grows taller,
though, and it's thicker bladed, and it cuts you
the same as Johnson grass. And we'd fallen down in
this stuff. That was what the bottom of this valley
was, filled with it. So there was a goodly number of
us that were sort of concealed by the grass. Even
though we were close, you couldn't see. I couldn't
see anyway. It was dark. I could hear things. And of
course the mosquitoes were having a field day on
us, all of us. I was afraid of tigers. I kept
thinking about tigers because tigers were in that
area and they liked to feed on dead bodies. For some
reason, that was my greatest fear, was a big tiger
coming down and grabbing me. uh i kept visualizing
it every time i heard a sound i would think that the
tiger was tiger was coming we had seen them before
tigers actually stuck around well they love to
feed them yeah they love to feed on the on the bodies
after a battle happened a number of times um of
course No tigers showed up, obviously. I guess
there was too much activity around, human
activity. They usually go to a battlefield where
there was bodies and there was nobody around. We'd
find their evidence later many times. The next
day, the battle picked up again early in the
morning before daylight. A lot of artillery fire.
I didn't know whose it was. Some planes passed
overhead. There was some rocket fire, heavy
weapons fire, light weapons fire. I didn't know
who was firing at whom. I just continued to lie
there. Around noon, maybe a little later, I'm not
sure, the weapons fire picked up pretty heavy, and
it was around the edge of the valley, I could tell,
coming down from the hills. Sometime that
afternoon, Fox Company, sister company of ours in
the same battalion, came in, and they took a few
casualties, quite a few, I think, and they started
pulling bodies out. And when I realized that our
people was there, of course, I called. And I was so
cramped I couldn't walk because I'd stayed in a
cramped position all night long, not moving. And I
thought I was wounded at the time. It turned out
that I wasn't. All told, there was 17 men that came
out of the company, including a portion of the
squad that had got away up on the hill. And that was
the biggest portion of the men that was left alive
out of E Company. All of us were evacuated. The
battalion commander ordered every single man in E
Company evacuated. There were several put up for
medals after that. It was put up for a bronze star.
It never came through. There was no witness, which
any kind of a citation has to be accompanied by a
witness. There was no living witness anyway.
After that, our battalion was sent to Okinawa.
That was several weeks later, two or three weeks.
We went back to Fubai. They let us rest up for a
while, and then they decided that we were no longer
combat effective. We were too weak materially. We
lost a lot of weapons. We lost a lot of men. Rather
than send the replacements to us, they sent them to
other outfits. They sent us back to Okinawa for
reorganization and re-equipping. That was my
last major operation in Vietnam. Well, that was
Deck House 4, that particular operation, the end
of Deck House 4. Hastings came, but Hastings and
Deck House 4 ran into each other. Where one ended,
the other began. We pulled, and our initial
contact with the North Vietnamese on Hastings
became like a stalemate. We had fought each other
down to a standstill, and that's when they threw
the 26 Marines in to try to post-corrupt the
attack, and that's when the 26 Marines was routed,
and we were thrown in to protect them. And then we
were chewed up. In the process, however, we did
manage, the battalion that I was in managed to
inflict very heavy casualties on the enemy. They
didn't get everything for nothing either. And
they pulled back into North Vietnam. It blunted
their attack totally. And that was our goal. So I
guess to that degree, we were successful. Later
after that, there were, of course, a lot more
operations. I was sent back to Okinawa, then sent
on back to the States, and then I got my separation
from active duty. I'd spent all total 22 months in
Vietnam, two tours of duty. I had a total of 13 major
combat operations. I don't know how many patrols
or minor skirmishes. Our battalion captured,
killed, I think the numbers was reported
something in the neighborhood of 4,000 enemy
troops from our battalion. We all together as a
battalion, 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines at that
time had the highest casualty rate of any American
combat command. But we had also the highest
prisoner rate and the highest kill rate of any
American combat command. We saw more action from
the beginning until the time that they pulled us
out than any other combat command. So forces
eliminated Vietnam and the 4th Marines? No, they
regrouped. They reorganized it. They sent it back
in with new men, new equipment, new material. The
4th Marines is still active today. The 4th
Marines, during World War II, the 4th Marines was
again made up of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Battalions.
The 1st and 3rd Battalions was surrendered
immediately at Corregidor by General
Wainwright. The 2nd Battalion at that time was not
on the Philippines. They were on detached duty to
some other part of the Pacific. They were not
surrendered at Corregidor. They were detached.
They had no regiment to belong to. The regimental
colors of the 4th Marine Regiment was nonexistent
until Operation Starlight. We won our regimental
colors back on Operation Starlight. We were
awarded colors again for the first time. All of
those years in between Corregidor and Operation
Starlight, the 4th Marine Regiment had no
regimental colors because they'd been
surrendered to the Japanese. The only American
combat command that could surrender colors, the
rest were remnants of command at Corregidor, was
the two battalions of the 4th Marine Regiment,
which was under an army general. The 2nd
Battalion, 4th Marines during World War II,
became what was known as a Raider Battalion. They
were the ones that took Macon Island. during the
Pacific. The 2nd Battalion, 4th Marines were
designated as Marine Raiders. They still told
that, or at least when I was in that title to the
date, they were the 2nd Marine Raider Battalion
assigned to the 4th Marine Regiment. So you have a
big history with the 4th Marines. The 4th Marines
used to be known as the China Marines. If you ever
heard of the Boxer Rebellion, the Marines that was
stationed in Peking, that was a unit of the Fourth
Marines, the China Marines. I saw the movie. That
was the units of the Fourth Marines. When you got
back to America, what were your reactions? I mean,
people, how they treated you. I didn't like it. I
was sent to Okinawa first. In Okinawa, we were
given a thorough physical examination to make
sure we weren't carrying any unwanted bugs back to
the States. We were given new uniforms. Are you
going to want to pay for that, or would you like to
keep it on the tab? I'll pay for it. Okay, sure. They
didn't do very much in the way of what you would call
orientation training or anything like that. I was
at that point in time, as were the other people with
me, we were nothing but combat Marines. That's all
I was. That's all I had learned. My life before then
had been totally subverted. When I looked at a
tree, I saw a possible place for a sniper. When I
looked at a bush, if it was big enough to conceal a
man, I saw a possible place for a sniper. When I saw a
door after the fighting, the in-house fighting in
the way, Remember, we learned then to go in by
tossing grenades before you walked in a building.
Because if the North Vietnamese proved to be quite
capable and willing to shoot, and even knowing
they would be killed, they would take somebody
with them. So we cleared a room by grenade. But
you've learned these things. What I'm trying to
say is, when I came back to the so-called
civilization, it was quite a shock for me. And as
I'm sure as it was for everybody else, it was very
difficult. The government didn't provide any
kind of... uh phase out uh returning you to
civilization we went from okinawa i was put on a
troop ship a usns ship it sent to uh yokohama japan
where we changed ship went on another type of a ship
it was a government ship but it was a larger one to
san francisco and it was 27 days across the
Pacific, I believe, into San Francisco. We came
under the Golden Gate. Golden Gate looked
beautiful. Hadn't been home in a long time. There
were on that ship hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of armed forces personnel, Army, Air
Force, Marine, Naval.
Most had been from Vietnam. They had given us fresh
uniforms, but we were still very tan. We were still
very skinny. We were still very much... We hadn't
been out of Vietnam that long. We were still very
much combat people, all of us. We were stopped in
the San Francisco Bay. On one side was Oakland. On
the other side was San Francisco. We could see the
lights of both cities in the evening, but the ship
was at anchor, and we didn't know why. It stayed at
anchor out there for three days. Then they took us
to the Army docks, I believe it was, for
debarkation. We went off, and then they trucked us
all the way around and we came back in through the
gates onto treasure island where once again we
were given medical examinations but on getting
into treasure island there was some kind of a
protest although they the government and the san
francisco police didn't allow the protesters to
get real close we could see them at a distance it was
looked to be like young people uh young men and
women that were yelling and and uh shouting and
there was a lot of them we went into the the Treasure
Island Naval Depot there. And they kept us there
for a period of time. They brought our shot records
up to date, which most of us were inspired. Why, I
don't know, but they did. They checked us over
again. It was our third physical, I think,
something like that, making sure we weren't
carrying any bugs again. And then they let us go.
They
let us go home in groups. They wouldn't let a whole
group of us go out together. We had to have
transportation to either the airport or the bus
station or wherever we were going by what means.
And we were not allowed a lot of liberty in San
Francisco. None of us could go into San Francisco.
The city of San Francisco requested that we not
have any liberty. So we were let out in groups of
seven or eight. I went by plane to Los Angeles
International. My parents picked me up there and I
was given
I want to say 20 days leave, and then I had to report
to El Toro, and it was only for a period of waiting
around for discharge, that's all. But I had to stay
in the government and make roll call each morning
and didn't do nothing there but drank beer and make
formations to say that I was still there. That gave
me another physical. Checked my teeth, which was
terrible. I think I had something like nine
fillings I had to get. Yeah. When you don't brush
your teeth for a long time, that sort of thing sort
of happens. We didn't have toothbrushes in
Vietnam. So it's really just like living like an
animal. Well, I guess by certainly by the
standards that we are accustomed to right now or
before it was. Do you think now after you came back
and you learned all the crap that happened over
there, do you think we could have won that war? We
could have won that war on any Friday. Anytime we
wanted to, we could have won the war. 1966, I
believe it was, we had 700,000 men in Vietnam,
American forces. There was, if they had allowed us
to cross the North Vietnamese border in force, a
combined land-sea attack, amphibious
operation, combined with probably a... airborne
operation and then a massive attack across the
border, we could have taken North Vietnam. But do
you think the Chinese might? That was the fear. At
least that's what we heard was the fear that if we
had attacked North Vietnam, the Chinese would
have become involved. I can't answer that. I don't
know. It would just be a speculation. My guess
would be as good as somebody else's. But I know we
could have taken North Vietnam. I have no doubt
about that. we were not allowed to cross borders
overtly. We had to do it covertly. When we went into
what they called incursions into Laos or Cambodia
or North Vietnam, it was done as a covert
operation. And that is to say we...
Sparrowhawk-type operations, missions, to pick
up downed pilots, or in some cases they were
reconnaissance missions. In some cases, we went
in for reconnaissance purposes, not necessarily
to do anything except, in some cases, we went in
with a, you have two types of patrols. You have a
combat patrol or a recon patrol. And some of those
patrols were combat, to go in to destroy a bridge,
to go in to blow up a SAM site. Those were rare,
really rare. Only if they couldn't get it some
other way, usually an airstrike could take them
out.
I
don't know if that answers your question, sir. We
talked about this earlier when I put the tape on
pause, but could you give your impression of the
argument of the South Vietnamese people as a whole
towards America?
The South Vietnamese people as a whole, I think,
looking back on it, were just kind of tired. That's
how they looked. They looked like they were tired.
They were tired of war. They were tired probably of
governments that were not functioning the way
they should. I don't think they trusted us. I think
that some few individuals that we met from time to
time and helped from time to time may have thought
that some few of us were okay people. I know that we
had contact with some South Vietnamese and it was a
good contact, but these were individuals meeting
individuals. I could equally say that I know on
some occasions where we had contact and it was a
negative contact because We burned the village
down. We destroyed the rice fields. We went in and
took the rice that was stored in storage between
seasons. It was considered, if we found rice, as a
possible stock for the enemy. So we destroyed it.
The most simple way was to throw it into a river. It
would swell, become no good.
I know that in those cases that the enemy, by their
looks, hated us. I remember one morning on one
operation, it was a search and destroy. Search and
destroy missions didn't usually have names like
the big operations. It was just a search and
destroy. They'd get you all up, form up a couple of
companies, and they'd march you to a village, and
you'd go through in line. You'd round up all the
people, bring them into the central village
square or the center of the village, as the case may
be, and then we would either arrange transport to
haul them out to relocation centers or move them by
foot to some place where they could get vehicles to
take them to relocation centers. The Vietnamese
were very much afraid of helicopters. They didn't
want to go on board them at all. Even when they were
wounded, they were afraid of them. They didn't
even particularly like getting on trucks. When
they would finally be forced on trucks, I think
many of them thought they were being taken to their
death. Our relocation centers that we set up were
designed to clear areas for combat operations so
that there would not be villagers in the way, so
that we could lay down artillery fire, we could
call in airstrikes without having civilians in
the way, so to speak. Of course, it's awfully hard
to tell a person who's lived in a village for all
their life and their parents lived there and their
grandparents before them, and you could probably
go back a few thousand years in some cases, that
this is done for their benefit. You can imagine the
average American, if they're suddenly uprooted
by foreign soldiers to come in at the point of
bayonets, get you out of your bed and say you're
being relocated for your own convenience, for
your protection. Most of our people would be
somewhat upset.
Although, by comparison to our homes, their homes
were back shots.
It was still their homes. Very tight land. Yes,
they were. They were a people, the South
Vietnamese, that... We're tired of war. They've
known war all their life, nothing but war. I don't
think that they welcomed us. I don't think they
particularly hated us, all of them. Some of them
did. Some of them didn't. Some of them, some
Vietnamese girls married American GIs. There
was, I wouldn't even venture as a guess to what
percentage that was, probably very low, but it was
like people anywheres. They were a people caught
up in a giant,
It was a mess. It was an interaction, a power
struggle between different ideologies. And they
were the people that was caught in the middle. I
cannot fault them because of their lack of
dedication to the war effort. Looking at it, at the
time being, I did. I have to be honest. At the time
being, I thought they were a gutless bunch of
creeps. We came over there to help them. And then in
the middle of the battle, they turned off and run.
But looking back on it in retrospect, It's awful
hard, taking it from their point of view, to really
hit them too hard, to criticize them too much.
We pulled out. We left. Most of those people stayed
behind, and they had to face their conquerors
then. And I'm sure many of them, the ones that were
the most loyal to us, the ones that were the most
friendly to us, I'm sure they suffered. I'm sure
their neighbors told on them.
Went down the wrong way. That's
rough.
The Arvin, as a military force, Yeah, second rate
at best. And that's a given. That's being nice. As
long as we bolstered up their planks and bolstered
up them, held them up, they could form the pretense
of an effective fighting force. The moment that we
weren't there, Defense crumbled so I could not
honestly say the Arvin was anything to be
respected as a military unit if that answers your
question, I You were They had other things over
there is equivalent to our National Guard. They
have what they call PS popular forces They were
usually barefoot They carried no pack no helmet
dressed in the typical village dress they would
have a rifle a pouch and Some ammunition. Any
number of things. All kinds of weapons. Communist
weapons, American weapons, French weapons,
anything and everything they could get. P.S.
generally, we employed them in the beginning as
scouts, as interpreters. Some of them spoke
English or broken English. The most difficult
thing we always had was interpretation, trying to
talk to the people. Americans are not bilingual.
even our officers are not and we're not then either
i think we're okay thank you
there was a goodly number of vietnamese who spoke
french more so than spoke english in fact so most
translations from vietnamese to french to
english a lot of it occurred that way There was some
who spoke English, or at least a bit of English, and
we would communicate by sign language and by
drawings and pictures and everything else. They
tried to assign to most companies an interpreter.
The interpreters We're pretty shaky. They might
be here today, it might be gone tomorrow, and you
had to watch your C-rations and your watch and any
personal effects you might have if they were
around. They would steal just as soon as not. Do you
think some of them were calm? Oh, yeah. Some of them
were, there's no doubt about it. Some were working
for both sides, were opportunist.
I think that the... We adopted a very casual, our
officers are the people that was in command. When
we set up areas such as major defense areas like Da
Nang, Dong Ho, Phu Bai, a lot of these places, they
would allow the Vietnamese to come in and set up a
trading market with the Americans. They would
sell things that we couldn't get through our
normal supply system, mirrors for shaving,
little pans to put water in instead of your hands.